
<!-- aboutWaCSE.md is generated from aboutWaCSE.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# Washington Climate Smart Estimator (WaCSE)

### Who and what is this tool for?

The Washington State Department of Agriculture (WSDA) developed WaCSE
for the Washington State Conservation Commission (SCC) to use in the
[Sustainable Farms and Fields](https://www.scc.wa.gov/sff) (SFF)
program. Intended users are SCC, conservation districts, and farmers
interested in identifying conservation practices to reduce greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions. The interactive platforms facilitate comparing GHG
emission reduction potentials from different conservation practices
across Washington’s diverse counties.

### Where do the potential GHG emission reduction values come from?

Values were determined by the United States Department of Agriculture’s
(USDA) Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS). NRCS reviewed
field studies and applied a sample-based metamodeling approach to
calculate potential GHG emission reduction values. The values are
derived from county-rectified major land resource areas (Swan et
al. 2020).

### What do the negative values mean?

Negative values indicate a loss of carbon or increased emissions of GHG
(Swan et al. 2020).

### How does this tool differ from COMET-Planner and COMET-Farm?

NRCS and Colorado State University developed
[COMET-Planner](http://comet-planner.com/) and
[COMET-Farm](http://comet-farm.com/). These GHG and carbon evaluation
tools were created using Daycent and Empirical Models, as outlined in
[USDA’s Quantifying Greenhouse Gas Fluxes in
Agriculture](https://www.usda.gov/sites/default/files/documents/USDATB1939_07072014.pdf).

COMET-Planner is a user-friendly tool that evaluates GHGs by county,
management practice, and acreage.  
COMET-Farm is a field-specific tool that requires more detailed
information such as parcel, management history, and intended
conservation practices.

The WaCSE uses raw data from COMET-Planner and presents it in tandem
with agricultural land use data. Unlike COMET tools, it allows quick
comparisons between multiple counties or practices at the same time.

At this time, the WaCSE does not calculate GHG reduction potentials
based on a specific number of acres. However, users can manually
calculate these values by multiplying the GHG emission reduction value
by the number of acres the practice would be implemented on. A second
version of the WaCSE is under development.

### Where did the agricultural land use data come from?

WSDA’s Natural Resources Assessment Section (NRAS) maps and inventories
acreage in crop production on a regular basis. This land use data is
obtained through windshield surveys, producers, aerial and satellite
imagery, and the USDA National Agricultural Statistics Survey (NASS)
Cropland Data Layer to identify agricultural land use (WSDA 2020).

### Where can I find more information about the NRCS conservation practices?

Technical guides for NRCS conservation practices standards (CPS) are
found
[here](https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/technical/cp/).

### References

Amy Swan, Mark Easter, Adam Chambers, Kevin Brown, Stephen A. Williams,
Jeff Creque, John Wick, Keith Paustian. 2020. COMET-Planner Dataset,
Version 2.1, Build 1, and COMET-Planner Report: Carbon and Greenhouse
Gas Evaluation for NRCS Conservation Practice Planning. A Companion
report to <http://www.comet-planner.com>.
<http://bfuels.nrel.colostate.edu/beta/COMET-Planner_Report_Final.pdf>.

WSDA. 2020. Agricultural Land Use \| Washington State Department of
Agriculture.
<https://agr.wa.gov/departments/land-and-water/natural-resources/agricultural-land-use>.
